Title: Hepatic Decompensation in Patients with Chronic Liver Disease: Exploring the Role of Vitamin D Deficiency as a Prognostic Marker

Abstract
Introduction: Although the function of vitamin D as a regulator of calcium and bone metabolism is well recognized, its role as an immunomodulator, regulator of cellular differentiation, and anti-inflammatory and antifibrotic actions is being increasingly noted. It is estimated that one-third of liver cirrhosis patients are vitamin D deficient. It has been reported that as liver disease progresses, the incidence of vitamin D deficiency rises. Several clinical implications of vitamin D levels have been proposed, including as a prognostic marker for the assessment of mortality in liver cirrhosis.

Aim: To analyze the link between levels of vitamin D and decompensation of liver cirrhosis.

Materials and methods: This observational, cross-sectional study was conducted on 100 patients with liver cirrhosis admitted at Goa Medical College, a tertiary care government hospital in Goa, from March 2020 to February 2022. Demographic profile, history, and examination findings were recorded, and biochemical analysis included vitamin D levels. Child-Pugh (CP) and Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) scores were calculated, and based on these, patients were grouped into classes of disease severity. Data was interpreted using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 22.

Results: Mean age of the study population was 50 ± 9 years, with a 96% male predominance. Mean levels of vitamin D were 12.13, with a standard deviation (SD) of 7.38. Significant differences were noted between different classes of CP score (CPS). A vitamin D deficient state was noted in 93.3% CP class C group and 0% of class A group. A statistically significant association was demonstrated between low levels of vitamin D and CP class severity of liver dysfunction as well as MELD scores.

Conclusion: This study confirms a high prevalence of vitamin D deficiency among patients with liver cirrhosis concurrent with the results of similar studies done earlier. More importantly, with increasing severity of hepatic decompensation as measured by CPS and MELD, vitamin D concentrations reduce.

