Title: Study of Correlation of Serum Vitamin D Levels with Arterial Stiffness and Cardiovascular Morbidity in Elderly Individuals of Western Rajasthan

Abstract
Introduction: Vitamin D deficiency is highly prevalent condition in western countries as well as in India. Lower level of vitamin D is associated with increased arterial stiffness by activating renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system leading to increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality including increased risk of coronary artery disease, stroke, peripheral vascular disease, hypertension, diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome. Our aim was to study the correlation between serum vitamin D level, various measures of arterial stiffness and cardiovascular morbidity in elderly individuals.

Material and method: The present study was conducted in collaboration with Department of Medicine, Department of Cardiology and Regional Geriatric Centre, NPHCE, MDM Hospital attached to Dr. S.N. medical college Jodhpur. Total 100 elderly individuals 60 yrs and above attending hospital for minor short illness, acute illness or for routine health checkup or with acute coronary events are included in the study. Vitamin D level was assessed by chemiluminescent immunoassay. Pulse Wave Velocity was determined by Periscope.

Results: In subjects with coronary artery disease, 28.30% were vitamin D deficient, 49.05% were vitamin D insufficient and only 22.64% are vitamin D sufficient. In healthy subjects, 25.53% were vitamin D deficient, 23.40% were vitamin D insufficient and 51.04% were vitamin D sufficient. The difference between these groups was statistically highly significant. (p value-0.006). Various measures of arterial stiffness including Rt baPWV, Lt baPWV, cf PWV and pulse pressure are more in vitamin D deficient group as compared to vitamin D sufficient group. The difference was statistically significant.

Conclusion: Vitamin D deficiency is quite common condition in elderly individuals which besides its bone mineralization action is also involved in cardiovascular functions. Deficiency of vitamin D may cause increase in arterial stiffness and widening of pulse pressure which are the predictor of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.

