Title: Epileptic Spasms During Recovery From Nutritional Infantile Vitamin B12 Deficiency

Abstract:
Development of epileptic spasms in infants with vitamin B12 deficiency is uncommon. In some cases, infants presenting with epileptic spasms have been found to have concurrent vitamin B12 deficiency. Treatment with vitamin B12 and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) resulted in resolution of epileptic spasms. In others, epileptic spasms have developed during recovery from vitamin B12 deficiency. Treatment with ACTH or other seizure medications resulted in resolution of epileptic spasms, although response has been less predictable. We describe three infants who initially presented with clinical and laboratory features of vitamin B12 deficiency. Treatment with vitamin B12 resulted in rapid resolution of symptoms. However, recovery was interrupted by the development of epileptic spasms. All infants showed hypsarrhythmia on electroencephalography. Treatment with prednisolone, with or without other antiseizure medications, resulted in slow resolution of spasms. Cognitive and language delays were noted in two infants. Epileptic spasms may supervene during recovery from vitamin B12 deficiency affecting outcomes.

Introduction:
Nutritional vitamin B12 deficiency is common in Indian infants and occurs secondary to vitamin B12 deficiency in the mothers.1 Clinically, it evolves through several stages representing progressive depletion of vitamin B12 stores.2 Symptomatic infants initially have nonspecific symptoms of irritability, feeding difficulties, failure to thrive, and aversion to solid foods, followed by development of pallor and skin hyperpigmentation. Left untreated, the disorder evolves into severe neurological dysfunction characterized by developmental delay, developmental regression, and involuntary movements.1,2 Treatment with vitamin B12 results in prompt reversal of symptoms, although it may take months or years for complete neurological recovery. Some cases are, however, left with long-term deficits in language and cognition.1,2

Seizures are an infrequent presentation of vitamin B12 deficiency in infants,3, 4, 5 although involuntary movements especially tremors with jerky character (sometimes called tremor-myoclonus)6 are a common feature and may be confused with epileptic seizures. Rarely, epileptic (infantile) spasms have been described in association with vitamin B12 deficiency, occurring either concurrently with vitamin B12 deficiency or during recovery from vitamin B12 deficiency following treatment with vitamin B12. In the former category, infants presented with epileptic spasms and were detected to have vitamin B12 deficiency on laboratory evaluation.7, 8, 9 In the latter category, epileptic spasms developed when the infants were recovering from vitamin B12 deficiency following treatment.9, 10, 11 There are only a few case reports of this latter association in the published literature. We described three infants who developed epileptic spasms during the recovery phase of vitamin B12 deficiency.





Section snippets
Methods
Three infants described below developed epileptic spasms during the course of recovery from nutritional vitamin B12 deficiency. All these infants had initially presented with clinical manifestations of vitamin B12 deficiency. Diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency was confirmed with appropriate laboratory investigations. All the three infants were treated with parenteral followed by oral vitamin B12. Gratifying and rapid recovery was noted until epileptic spasms supervened.

Discussion
Epileptic spasms are a rare occurrence in infants with vitamin B12 deficiency and have been reported to appear at two distinctive time periods during the course of disease (vitamin B12 deficiency). In the first instance (Table 1), vitamin B12 deficiency and the epileptic spasms occurred concurrently. These infants presented with epileptic spasms and on evaluation were found to have vitamin B12 deficiency. These infants were treated with adrenocorticotropic hormone (with or without other

